(upbeat rock music)
- [Narrator] They
walk downstairs.
- Slimy?
No, that's not it.
- [Narrator] They
bounce, they stretch,
and they spin.
A flying disc.
A walking metal coil.
- Stealthy?
- No.
- [Narrator] But where
did they come from?
And who created them?
- It's Slinky.
- [Narrator] The untold stories
behind America's most
iconic toy innovations.
- Kids want real toys.
- They must have
thought he was crazy.
Crazy!
- [Narrator] The
visionary ideas.
- Some of the best toys
break some sort of rule.
- It became such a craze
that it caught the attention
of president Johnson.
- [Narrator] The
happy accidents.
- If you uncoil the slinky,
suddenly it can be used
as a radio antenna.
- [Narrator] And the
spectacular fails.
- They're suing us.
- He believed enough in it,
even though he was
severely in debt.
- It's just a true Testament
to the kind of
woman that she was,
fearless, determined.
(man laughing)
- We're gonna have so much fun.
- [Narrator] In
the spring of 1943,
the United States is
fighting a world war
in Europe and the Pacific.
- Most people were confident
that the United States
entry into the war
in 1941, 1942 was
tipping the balance.
But by 1943, the war seems
to be turning in their favor,
but it's very much
up in the air.
It was not a sure
thing by any stretch.
- [Narrator]
Critically important
is maintaining
control of the sea,
where ships very vital resources
to the 16 million men and women
serving in the armed forces.
Back at home, millions,
more work overtime
in support of the war effort.
Like one mechanical engineer
at a shipyard in Philadelphia,
who's doing his part to
try solving a problem
that plagues US warships.
His name is Richard James.
- He is charged with trying
to come up with a way
to keep sensitive
instruments safe on ships
while they're out at sea.
You know, what's
going to keep them
from falling and breaking.
- And he thought that
suspending that equipment
by torsion Springs,
which are Springs with
no tension on them,
he might be able to keep
it functioning properly.
- Richard James was
full of ingenuity.
He was a guy who could not
repress his creative endeavors.
He started as a kid
scavenging parts
and making his own toys.
So he had an entrepreneurial
bent as well.
- He accidentally knocks
over one of the Springs
and it just happened
to kind of bounce
and it appeared almost
like it was walking.
- [Narrator] The runaway
spring will one day become
an iconic American toy
selling more than 300
million worldwide.
But on this day in 1943,
it's up to James to figure
out what to do with it.
- You could practically
see the light bulb
go on over his head.
And he said to his wife, Betty,
I think we've got a toy here.
Betty by now has been
through loads of ideas
that Richard churned out.
Undoubtedly, she thought,
oh no, here we go again.
- Apparently he brought
home a lot of strange ideas
to his wife.
- I'm telling you Betty,
it's like some kind
of magic trick.
It doesn't work every
time, but when it does.
- There's no gain to it.
Why would children want to
play with such a simple thing?
- Because where you
see coiled wire,
they'll see something
that acts like it's alive
and moves by itself.
- He's got that inventor's mind.
He saw something that
he couldn't convince
other people to see yet.
It was a huge uphill
battle for him.
- During world war
II a lot of toys
were made of card or paper
because essential materials
like zinc, steel, rayon,
were needed for the war efforts.
- [Narrator] The Navy
rejects James's idea
to use coiled springs to
stabilize ship equipment.
So he throws himself into
his long shot creation
and for two years,
experiments with different
types of steel wire.
- There are so many
variables to perfect
when you're making
a spring device.
There's tension,
there's the kind of kinetic
energy that you want to release.
Lots of physics,
lots of mechanics.
He tested and tried
and prototyped,
eventually coming up with a
Swedish blue industrial steel
coiled spring with
just exactly 98 coils.
It's stacks two and
a half inches tall.
- I've got it, come see.
(both laughing)
- [Narrator] With
Betty finally on board,
she makes a pivotal
contribution.
- What are we going to call it?
Slimy? No, that's not it.
- Stealthy?
- No, no that's not it.
It's slinky.
- Slinky.
- She found the word slinky
and she thought it was perfect,
and the rest is history.
- [Narrator] Next,
Richard and Betty
take the biggest
gamble of their lives.
- They decided to borrow $500
and make 400 Slinky's by
hiring an outside firm
to make them in a model shop.
- It's only the start
of the challenge though.
And then to really start
selling it to retailers,
because this looks
like no other toy
out there on the market.
- [Narrator] 170 Miles away,
at the General Electric
labs in Connecticut,
a chemical engineer
works on another problem
plaguing the US war effort.
- We don't think of rubber
when we think of waging war,
but it's pretty essential.
It's a component
in so many pieces
of this vast military arsenal.
- If we don't get rubber
we'll have to stop
making good tanks.
- [Narrator 2] We
also need rubber tires
for Jeeps and planes.
- [Narrator] Naturally
occurring rubber
is harvested from trees no
longer accessible to the US.
- Japan had invaded a lot of
the rubber producing countries,
sort of cut off our supply.
- Because of the war effort,
it becomes paramount to create
a synthetic
alternative to rubber.
- [Narrator] Chemical
engineer James Wright
makes it his mission
to come up with one.
- James Wright had
been born in Scotland
and he was working
for General Electric
on various different challenges.
- [Narrator] He mixes different
chemicals with silicone oil
and when he adds boric
acid, it solidifies.
But instead of forming a
hard rubber like substance,
the compound remains
soft, sticky,
unlike anything
Wright has ever seen.
- A ball of this putty bounced
if you threw it on the floor,
would settle into a
puddle if left alone.
- You can stretch it to great
lengths without it snapping.
- James Wright kept showing
this new goo to his coworkers,
but no one could find
an application for it.
- They actually sent it out
to a bunch of
different scientists
so maybe that they could
figure out a way to use it.
After a while he
couldn't figure out
how to really use
what he created
and he gave up on it.
- [Narrator] Wright has no
idea this bizarre substance
will help usher in a
completely new market for toys,
sell over 350 million pieces,
and make nearly half
a billion dollars
for someone else.
- [Newsreel announcer] September
2nd, 1945 and Americas joy
bubbled over into
unrestrained jubilation.
- The period after
the second world war
is a moment of tremendous
economic opportunity.
And as American
soldiers return home,
they're looking for a
return to normality,
to enjoy the prosperity that
comes from the end of the war.
And so what you see
are Americans seeking
that prosperity
in all kinds of areas.
- [Narrator] Including
one former Naval engineer,
who's happy to leave the war
behind to chase his new dream.
Richard James uses the rest of
his savings, and a $500 loan,
to start the James
spring and wire company.
Betting everything on 400
of his one and only product,
The Slinky.
Now, he must convince local
toy stores to sell it.
- I know, you're thinking,
that looks like just
an ordinary spring.
- It is just an ordinary spring.
- Well, that is
where you're wrong.
I just need to get our plank
from my car and I can show you.
Just one moment, okay?
- Look, kids want real toys.
- Okay, here look.
- Not interested.
- I can't even imagine
what any toy store owner
or buyer would have thought
when Richard James walked
in trying to sell a spring.
- [Narrator] By November, 1945,
Richard James is
running out of time.
- The big sales time for
toys is at the holidays,
if you can't sell your toy
during the Christmas season,
you are basically washed up.
This was his make
or break moment.
- [Narrator] He talks Gimbals,
one of the most popular
department stores
in Philadelphia,
into displaying his new toy.
- If Gimbals didn't sell,
if the Slinky's didn't
fly off the shelves,
he was at the end of the line.
- But as Christmas nears,
not a single Slinky is sold.
- You've gotta eat something.
Where are you going?
- Gimbals.
- Richard James wasn't
just an inventor.
- Come on over, folks,
and see what the
amazing Slinky can do.
- He was a showman and he
was going to show the world
that Slinky was a thing.
- Mam, would you like to see
what the amazing Slinky can do?
Let me show you.
All you do is tip it like this.
- [Narrator] In
less than two hours
James sells all 400 Slinky's,
but he doesn't make a cent.
- He had a problem because
the Slinky's that he created
were only a dollar at retail.
So there wasn't a lot
of margin in there.
- [Narrator] So Richard
James needs a new plan
or his new creation
is worthless.
By 1947, it's been four years
since General Electric
engineer, James Wright,
created his strange
putty substance.
While GE did patent
the invention,
they've done nothing with it.
- At the end of four
years of research,
it came down that there
was no practical use
for this bouncing putty.
- [Narrator] But one evening,
the substance makes the
rounds at a GE cocktail party
and an out of work
copywriter takes an interest.
- Peter Hodgson
was an ad writer,
but he was kind of between jobs,
he was in debt, he was
looking for his next gig.
- So Peter's at this party.
He so intrigued and fascinated
watching everyone
play with this putty.
- Look, he's been playing with
this stuff for 15 minutes.
Somebody's going to get
rich off this stuff,
I say it might as well be us.
- GE agrees to sell the
rights to the putty,
to Hodgson for just $147.
- Ruth Fallgater owned a
shop called The Block Shop
in New Haven, Connecticut
and she did a yearly catalog.
And in 1949, her and Peter
worked together on the copy,
which featured bouncing putty,
but it was marketed
more toward adults.
It was in a clear plastic case
and it was on a page
alongside a spaghetti maker.
- [Narrator] Sales are abysmal.
- Ruth said, you can
take it from here
because it's not
selling well enough.
And that's when Peter
Hodgson said, okay,
I'm on my own with this.
- [Narrator] As one
partnership dissolves,
another one starts.
Across the country,
childhood friends,
Rich Knerr and
Arthur "Spud" Melin
are looking to find their way.
- They had a perfect
Southern California
sort of vibe around them.
The kind of attitude that,
we don't know what
we're going to do
with our college degrees
but whatever we choose,
we're going to
have fun doing it.
- [Narrator] The enterprising
duo dream of a business,
selling and training
falcons for hunting.
- And the way they were going
to train the falcons is,
they were going to shoot
meatballs in the air
and watch the falcons
chase after them.
- But regular slingshots aren't
durable or powerful enough,
so they build their own version.
(man laughing)
- We're gonna have so much fun.
- They were made
from Southern Ash
and they had strips of
rubber from south America
and then they hand tied
leather as the pouch.
- [Narrator] With new
and improved slingshots,
Rich and Spud are ready to get
their Falcon training
business off the ground.
- Morning.
- Hi, what can we do for you?
- I'm shopping for a Falcon,
but what's that thing.
- It's how we teach the
birds to dive for prey,
and meatballs.
- Can I try?
- Sure.
- It turns out their homemade
slingshots were so durable,
so good, and so accurate,
that people were more interested
in the slingshots
themselves, than the birds.
- [Narrator] For
a $7 down payment
they buy a bandsaw and
start making slingshots
in the Knerr family garage.
- So here these guys are,
they're taking these slingshots
and hitting targets with them.
And they sort of took
that like comic book vibe
and they're like, wham,
the targets hit wham.
- Oh!
[laughter]
- [Narrator] They
call their Slingshot,
the Wham-O Sportsman.
And in 1949, the
Wham-O company is born.
One day, they will sell many
of the most recognizable
toys of all time
and their iconic creations
will be worth billions.
But for now they're
not even thinking toys.
- That Slingshot led to things
like blow guns and boomerangs
and fencing swords.
It was a little bit
all over the map
and it was also a
pretty small demographic
that would want their products.
- [Narrator] Despite
taking in $100,000 a year,
Wham-O's founders
reach a crossroads,
continue selling to a
niche market or aim higher.
- They were never
going to break through
without thinking
outside the box.
Something that would reach
the consumers in a fresh way.
- [Narrator] With the
baby boom in full swing,
the United States is primed
for a toy revolution.
If the creative minds
behind the Slingshot,
Slinky, and Bouncing Putty
want to be part of it,
they must risk
everything to capitalize
or lose it all.
(birds chirping)
(suspenseful instrumental music)
- [Narrator] In April, 1950,
entrepreneur Peter
Hodgson is $12,000 in debt
on his Bouncing Putty.
He's been marketing
it to adults,
but now he envisions
a new approach.
(suspenseful instrumental music)
- [David] He realizes
Easter's around the corner,
and he thinks about an egg.
Why don't we take
that substance,
and put it in an egg shape,
and we'll sell it
as a Easter toy.
- [Narrator] And the
former ad executive
introduces another new idea.
- [Christopher] Bouncing Putty
was the original name,
but it really deserved
something better.
And one of Peter Hodgson's
ingenious moments
was to rebrand it.
(dramatic instrumental music)
- [Tim] He discovered
that if you flattened it,
and pressed it on a comic book,
it would pull the picture
right off the page,
and then you could
stretch the face,
and then make all
kinds of funny shapes.
- [Narrator] Then
a few months later,
the New Yorker Magazine
publishes a story
about Silly Putty.
- [Christopher] It was
the kind of earned PR
that every product manager
dreams of in just three days.
Silly Putty sales
went to 250,000 units.
- [Narrator] In
less than a year,
Silly Putty becomes a
blockbuster toy worldwide.
- [Christopher] Silly Putty
proves to be Peter Hodgson's
ticket to the good life.
He lives a life of luxury.
He has hundreds of millions
of dollars in assets.
- [Narrator] Peter
Hodgson dies in 1976,
leaving an estate
valued at $140 million.
The next year his company
is sold to Crayola,
and sales of Silly
Putty ultimately reach
more than 300 million units.
(upbeat instrumental music)
- [Christopher] Kids
may have been using
Silly Putty in all
sorts of fun ways,
but adults saw some
practical uses.
It was great for getting
pet hair off of things
or lint off your clothing
or grime off your painted walls.
The Apollo 8
astronauts also used it
as a way of adhering their tools
from floating around
the space capsule
when they were in zero gravity.
This is one of
those evergreen toys
that just keeps on selling.
(upbeat instrumental music)
- [Narrator] Meanwhile,
by the mid 1950s,
Slinky has also finally
become a big moneymaker
thanks to Richard
James's ingenuity.
- [Tim] Well, after
the success at Gimbels,
he had to figure out a
way to make these himself.
He couldn't farm it
out to a machine shop.
There wasn't a lot
of margin in there.
So what did he do
as an engineer?
He ended up designing
the machines
that would take 80 feet of wire,
and coil at 98 times
to make Slinkys.
- [Narrator] Demand is so big,
he builds six
machines to keep up.
- [Christopher] Slinky
is often running,
or maybe I should
say often walking,
and it's a good business.
(upbeat instrumental music)
The James family
buys 31 acre estate
in Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania,
one of the priciest
neighborhoods
in Philadelphia.
They've got six
kids, life is good.
- [Narrator] Outwardly,
everything looks perfect,
but all isn't as it appears.
(suspenseful instrumental music)
(seagulls chirping)
In 1957,
looking for their own
million dollar idea,
Wham-O Co-founders Rich Knerr,
and Spud Melin are
strolling on the beach
when it finds them.
- Ow.
- Oh-oh-oh.
What's that?
(upbeat instrumental music)
- Like a miniature
flying saucer.
Man, can it go. (laughs)
(upbeat instrumental music)
- [Narrator] They
return the strange disc
to its owner,
former air force
pilot, Fred Morrison.
- [Tim] Fred Morrison
was a World War II pilot.
One day he was on the beach
throwing a metal pie tin,
when a beachcomber came up,
and wanted to buy
the tin from him.
Now it was a 5
cent cake pan tin,
and he could sell
it for 25 cents.
And that's when he decided
I need to go into business.
- [Narrator] Morrison,
substitutes the cake
pan tin for plastic,
and calls it the Whirlo Way
after a famous racehorse.
Then later changes it
to The Flyin-Saucer.
- [Tim] This was around 1947
when Roswell was happening,
and everything was outer space.
So he thought the flying saucer
would be a good
thing to call it.
- [Narrator] After updating
the design in 1954,
Morrison changes the name again
to the Pluto Platter.
- Names of very important,
and you can build a
brand around a name.
Who's going to buy
a Pluto Platter?
- [Narrator] Sales
never do take off,
but enter Rich and Spud
who think they can
make it a success.
(air swooshing)
Wham-O buys the manufacturing,
and production
rights from Morrison.
They make design modifications
to increase the
accuracy and distance,
and look to its origins
to find a new name.
(upbeat instrumental music)
- [Tim] So early on,
people would throw
metal pie tins
from the Frisbies Pie Company,
and they would say
like in golf, "Four."
They would yell "Frisbee!"
So they decided to
trademark the name,
and that's how the
Frisbee was born.
(upbeat instrumental music)
- [Narrator] In the
first two years,
Wham-O sells more
than a million disks.
- They decided they're
gonna go to all
the college campuses,
and these college kids
start figuring out
how to play like
Frisbee football
or even Frisbee golf.
- [Announcer] Hundreds
of Frisbee players
have come to display
their skills.
- [David] And all of
these things eventually
solidified Frisbee's position
as the premier throwing disk.
- [Narrator] With the Frisbee's
popularity spreading,
Knerr and Melin
are now officially
in the toy business,
but nothing could prepare
them for the world,
for the toy Wham-O
would unleash next.
(suspenseful instrumental music)
- It doesn't bite.
It does do something
amazing thing folks.
- [Narrator] By the late 1950s,
Slinky's creator Richard James,
and his wife, Betty
appear to be living
the American Dream.
But as sales of the
Slinky begin to decline,
Richard suffers
a midlife crisis.
- Richard isn't getting
as much publicity
as he craves.
He starts getting distracted.
He starts having affairs.
- [Narrator] Richard also joins
a religious organization,
and start sending them
large amounts of money.
- He goes all in.
He's donating money
left and right.
He donate so much money
that he put the Slinky
Company in huge debt.
- Things are starting to get
really tough financially.
They owe banks and steel
suppliers more money
than what they're taking in.
- [Narrator] Within
a few months,
Richard James downward
spiral takes another turn.
(suspenseful instrumental music)
(suitcase thuds)
- Honey?
(Richard sighs)
- The Lord has called me
to help spread his word
to the people of South America.
I'll be leaving
for Bolivia today.
- What are you talking about?
- This is my calling.
The Lord has-
- What about the children?
- You'll figure it out.
As for the company,
let the creditors have it,
unless you wanna
run it yourself.
- Maybe I'll do exactly that.
(suspenseful instrumental music)
(footsteps thudding)
- [Azhelle] At a
time where women
were definitely not expected
to take on that kind
of responsibility
or even be capable of taking
on that kind of responsibility,
it's just a true testament
to the kind of
woman that she was,
fearless, determined.
(suspenseful instrumental music)
- [Narrator] Betty
takes out a mortgage
on her home,
determined to revive
the Slinky brand.
She gambles everything she has
on a Hail Mary.
(soft instrumental music)
- [Jordan] Betty James
had very, very little resources.
So what does she do?
She goes out and hires musicians
to write a jingle.
She knew that if she can
have a catchy jingle,
people would remember it,
and they would remember
the product brand.
- Jingles in the
1960s were huge.
Absolutely huge.
You would hear
them on the radio,
see them on the television.
Well, these were
powerful marketing tools.
♪ Who walks the stairs
without a care ♪
♪ It shoots so high in the sky ♪
♪ Bounce up and down
just like a clown ♪
♪ Everyone knows its Slinky ♪
- [Narrator] But will
a jingle be enough
to save the company?
And Betty James is
sinking fortunes.
(upbeat instrumental music)
Meanwhile, after
making a fortune
on the Slingshot
and the Frisbee,
Wham-O founders Rich
Knerr and Spud Melin
are looking for
their next big idea.
- [Laurie] I think
that Melin and Knerr
didn't think they were you know,
the only ones that can
invent something fabulous.
And they had this
amazing open door policy.
It didn't matter who you were.
If you had an idea,
they were going to listen.
(footsteps thudding)
- So this is a buddy of yours?
- It's his wife.
So she has something
to use for exercise
in Australia.
He thinks we'll get
a kick out of it.
- One of Melin's neighbors,
Joan Anderson returned
from Australia
with a bamboo exercise hoop.
(upbeat instrumental music)
(Rich and Spud applauds)
- [Jazmine] One of Jones'
friends mentioned that
the movements that she made
kind of reminder
of Hula dancers,
and boom, the name
Hula Hoop was born.
- [Azhelle] When they saw it,
and how it was being used,
kind of a light bulb
moment went off.
They thought we can
manufacture this,
and we can make
this into a fun toy.
(Hula Hoop spinning)
- [Jordan] They set up
this handshake deal.
It was totally verbal,
no paper at all.
And they said,
"If the Hula Hoop becomes a hit,
we'll give you royalties."
And that's how it all started.
(soft instrumental music)
(suspenseful instrumental music)
- [Narrator] Before
it hits shelves,
Wham-O upgrades the hoop,
(upbeat instrumental music)
with a new durable
lightweight plastic,
and eye-catching colors
to replace the bland
wood tone of the bamboo.
- [Azhelle] They put
beads inside of it
so that when kids
would move their hips,
you'd get a fun sound effect.
(upbeat instrumental music)
- [Tim] They went
to local parks,
and had different
people demo it,
and get kids in
Southern California
to talk about it and
wanna play with it.
- [Jazmine] People were
drawn to the Hula Hoop.
It was so simple but
required concentration.
It had a rhythm to
it kind of hypnotic.
(upbeat instrumental music)
- [Announcer] It's the
new Shoop Shoop Hula Hoop,
with the new shoop
sounds in the hoop.
Hey, take it out,
show it everywhere.
It's more fun from Wham-O.
- [Tim] They were
making it as fast
as they could,
but also farming
out to production
to many different places
just to simply to
keep up with demand.
- [Narrator] By
the summer of 1958,
the Hula Hoop becomes
the biggest toy fad
the world has ever seen.
(dramatic instrumental music)
But not everyone is
celebrating Wham-O smash hit.
- They're suing us.
- Oh, that sure doesn't
read like a love letter.
(suspenseful instrumental music)
(upbeat rock music)
- [Narrator] In 1963,
after years of debt
and declining sales,
Betty James hopes
to bring Slinky
back from the brink of ruin.
Betting everything
on an expensive
marketing campaign
with a new catchy jingle.
♪ It's Slinky ♪
♪ For fun the best of the toys ♪
♪ The favorite of
girls and boys ♪
♪ It's Slinky ♪
♪ It's a fun and wonderful toy ♪
♪ Slinky Slinky it's
for girls and boys ♪
- Yeah, I'm a nerd.
So I remember that
stuff. (laughs)
Yeah, I know.
- It was cool.
- [Carl] Every time
they hear the jingle,
they think of the toy.
So it was genius.
And so that's why
it became popular.
- [Richard] And
Betty had the vision,
and realized that television,
and jingles and this
kind of marketing
was extremely important
in embedding the product
into American society.
So she bet,
She made a bet and she won.
- [Narrator] Ironically,
the toy that started
as a failed design
for the military in World War II
would later be used
during the Vietnam War.
- [David] If you uncoil
the Slinky and throw it,
say up in a tree
or put one hand on a
pole and stretch it out,
suddenly it can be
used as a radio antenna
because it's the perfect length
for the seven to eight
megahertz frequency range
for communications in the field.
(upbeat instrumental music)
- [Narrator] Betty
goes on to run
James Industries
for nearly 40 years
as President and CEO.
And just a few years
before she sells
the company in 1998,
the movie "Toy Story"
brings back the Slinky dog.
More than 300 million Slinkys
in all varieties will
sell in James's lifetime.
Enough to circle the earth
about 150 times, if stretched.
- Betty moved product,
she got orders in hand,
and she made the most of it.
She proved to be every
bit as good a salesperson
as Richard was without
the liabilities.
(suspenseful instrumental music)
- [Narrator] Meanwhile,
Wham-O is facing
their own liability.
- [Rich] They're suing us.
- [Jazmine] Hulu
was a huge success.
But the two that had
brought the idea to 'em,
Joan and Wayne Anderson,
hadn't seen any royalties.
- [Narrator] And the lawsuit
isn't their only problem.
- What does that look like?
- It looks like a Hulu Hoop.
- [Rich] It sure does.
But it's not.
It's a Hoop Around,
they're cheaper
than a Hula Hoop,
(suspenseful instrumental music)
and they're everywhere.
(glasses thuds)
- They couldn't stop people
from creating plastic
hoops just like theirs.
So you've got all
kinds of counterfeits
coming out onto the markets
like the Hooper Dupers
and the Wiggler Hoops.
- [Narrator] They
manufactured tens of millions
more Hula Hoops,
but demand
dramatically drops off.
And by the end of 1958,
the company reports a
loss of about 90,000
in today's dollars.
The Hula Hoop bubble
has officially burst.
(dramatic instrumental music)
- They couldn't give them away.
And of course,
they stopped the production.
In fact,
we have an expression,
"It went the way
of the Hula Hoop."
Meaning that it went away.
- [Narrator] Knerr and Melin
must now make good on
that handshake deal
with a warehouse full
of unsold Hula Hoops,
and a growing debt.
- [Christopher] When
the Anderson's case
finally got settled in court,
Wham-O had so few assets
that they only had to pay
the Anderson's a mere
$6,000 for their concept,
which had turned into
this incredible toy craze.
- [Narrator] To
save their company,
Knerr and Melin must
do what they do best,
find another hit
before it's too late.
(soft instrumental music)
- [Narrator] After the
meteoric rise,
and spectacular
fall of the Hula hoop,
founders Rich Knerr
and Arthur Melin
are desperate to get
Wham-O back on track.
- [Christopher] Wham-O basically
has a business
model that they burn
white hot with a
toy for a while,
and then demand drops off.
Now they're on the lookout
for the next big thing.
(upbeat instrumental music)
- And a pollster
named Robert Carrier
came home one day to see his son
sliding on their
concrete driveway,
he had the hose running,
and it was slick concrete.
- [Christopher]
Robert had the idea
to take vinyl coated plastic
called Naugahyde,
stitched it at intervals,
inserted a hose,
and the water squirted
out at those intervals.
- [Narrator] After
trading out Naugahyde
for a less expensive
vinyl plastic,
Wham-O introduces America
to the Slip 'N Slide.
It immediately sells
3,000 units at $9.95
in a matter of months.
It's a simple toy,
but it was a huge
hit for these guys.
- [Narrator] Then
another inventor
approaches them with
a new opportunity.
- [Christopher] Norman
Stingley was an engineer
working in the
petrochemical industry.
- [Tim] He devised a way
to take this specialized
rubber called polybutadiene,
and molded in such a
way that it would create
a very, very dense
high bouncing ball.
Basically you can
throw it under a table
on an angle,
it will hit the floor,
hit the table,
and then reverse it,
spin and come back to you.
And it was this table trick
that made Spud and Rich
have that wow moment,
because a lot of
high bounce balls
were on the market,
but not ones that could do that.
(upbeat instrumental music)
- [Narrator] Wham-O
introduces the Super Ball.
And once again,
has a smash hit
in the hands of
kids across America.
- They sold 6 million
of 'em in 1965 alone.
- [Announcer] Discover
your youth power
with Super Ball.
Under a dollar
wherever toys are sold.
- I got my Super Ball!
- [Announcer] By Wham-O.
- [David] It became such a craze
that it caught the attention
of President Johnson.
President Johnson
orders five dozen
of these balls,
and gives them away
as presidential gifts.
(upbeat instrumental music)
(dramatic instrumental music)
- [Narrator] It's rumor
that the Super Ball
may have also inspired the name
of the most watched
professional sporting
event in America.
In 1966,
Pro Footballs AFL
and NFL conferences
prepare to battle it
out in a final big game
to be called the World
Championship Game.
- [Jazmine] Lamar Hunt,
the founder of the AFL,
and the owner of the
Kansas City Chief
saw his kids playing
with the Super Ball.
(dramatic instrumental music)
- [Christopher] And in
a play on that name,
he gave that big game
a new title that
has stuck with it
for more than half a century.
(fans cheering)
- [Announcer] The
Chief's on to the banger.
35 to 10.
A super debut for
the Super Bowl.
(upbeat instrumental music)
- [Narrator] America's
most iconic toys
have captured the
imagination for decades.
(tools clanking)
But it's their creators,
and the challenges they faced
that are truly inspiring.
- Betty James is
definitely a hero of mine.
She was not only a genius,
but she also forged
a way for women
in the toy business.
- [Christopher] Peter
Hodgson was a man
who fulfilled his dream,
fame fortune, the good life,
all thanks to that
little egg full of goo.
- [Tim] Richard Knerr
and Arthur Spud Melin
were really fun-loving guys,
and it was always
the wow factor.
They wanted to find a toy
that made you sort
of step back and go,
"Whoa, that was interesting."
(Slinky thuds)
- [Azhelle] Novelty
toys built America
in the sense that they
have allowed people
at every price point
to get in on the fun.
- [Christopher] Toys
like Slinky, Silly Putty,
the Hula Hoop build
us as a culture,
as country,
and as a toy industry
they united people.
- [Tim] All of these toys,
what they have in common
is they're hands-on toys.
There's a connection
between your hands,
and your brain in the
development of kids.
So these toys certainly
built the kids
that would grow up
and build America.
(upbeat instrumental music)